Everything we create has some value because of the time and money that we have invested in it. In this lesson, we will look at the Earned Value Management (EVM) approach to track the value being created in a project as we go through its various phases. Earned Value Management, or EVM, uses certain well-defined metrics which can be very handy in assessing the project status. EVM is a commonly used method of performance management that integrates scope, cost, and schedule measures, which, if you recall from our previous lessons, form the triple constraint that a project must meet to be considered successful.

This approach analyzes a project from three key dimensions: Planned Value (PV), Earned Value (EV), and Actual Cost (AC). To understand these dimensions, let us take a simple example. Let us say we are working on a project in which we need to develop four new user stories for the next release over a sprint duration of four weeks. Let us further assume that the cost of personnel, that is the team working on the project, is four thousand dollars per week, and that the cost of infrastructure, that is office hardware and software, electricity, etc., is one thousand dollars per week. The total budget per week is five thousand dollars. Given that, we can see that when we will be done with this four-week project, we would have spent five thousand dollars multiplied by four weeks, which is twenty thousand dollars. This is called the Budget at Completion, which is something that is given to us as the starting point.

Now, let us say two weeks have passed. Assuming that each week we are planning to produce equal value, we should have completed 50 percent of the work, which means that we should have produced the value of fifty percent of twenty thousand dollars, which is ten thousand dollars. That is the Planned Value. Also, since two weeks have passed, we would have expended fifty percent of the cost, which is ten thousand dollars. This is the Actual Cost. But when we check our status, we find that we have actually completed only forty percent of the work. So, how much value have we earned? It is 40 percent of 20,000 dollars, which is 8,000 dollars. This is the Earned Value. With these simple calculations, we can do the Earned Value Analysis. Now, we have Budget at Completion as twenty thousand, Planned Value as ten thousand, Earned Value as eight thousand, and Actual Cost as ten thousand.

The first metric is **Schedule Performance Index (SPI)**, which tells us how we are doing in terms of the schedule. SPI is Earned Value divided by Planned Value, which in this case would be 0.8. When SPI is less than 1, it tells us we are behind schedule. Another metric related to the schedule is Schedule Variance, which is simply Earned Value minus Planned Value, which is minus two thousand dollars in this case. This is the cost of delay in the project at this stage.

Now, we look at cost metrics. The first one is **Cost Performance Index (CPI)**, which is Earned Value divided by Actual Cost, which is 0.8 in this case. This 0.8 is less than 1 again, indicating that we are over budget, meaning we have spent more money than the value we produced. Cost Variance is Earned Value minus Actual Cost, which is minus two thousand dollars. Finally, the last metric is what will it take to come back on track, which is the **To Complete Performance Index (TCPI)**. This is Budget at Completion minus Earned Value divided by Budget at Completion minus Actual Cost, which is 1.2. This means that if we perform at 1.2 times the current performance, we will be able to catch up by the end of four weeks.

So, these metrics give us a quick understanding of how the project is doing. If CPI and SPI are equal to or greater than 1, then we are in good shape. If they are less than 1, then we are in trouble. Another way to visualize the project progress is to plot these metrics over time. Here is a project for which we are plotting AC, PV, and EV. You will intuitively see that EV should be higher than or at least equal to AC. PV, which is the green line, is what we plan to achieve. EV is what we are actually producing. The project started off well, but then its EV dipped below PV, indicating some kind of slippage. You also see that AC goes above PV and EV, but then it recovers. Every project undergoes these fluctuations, and it is a good idea to use these metrics to track and make course corrections as needed.

To summarize, EVM is a great technique to track project progress in terms of its performance in cost, schedule, and value it creates. The key measurements are Budget at Completion, Planned Value, Earned Value, and Actual Cost, and using these measurements, you can calculate CPI and CV to track cost, SPI and SV to track schedule, and TCPI to track performance.